Seven passages:
1. Do not lie with a man as one lies with a woman; that is detestable. --Leviticus 18: 22
2. If a man lies with a man as one lies with a woman, both of them have done what is detestable. They must be put to death; their blood will be on their own heads. --Leviticus 20: 13
3. No Israelite man or woman is to become a shrine prostitute. You must not bring the earnings of a female prostitute or of a male prostitute into the house of the LORD your God to pay any vow, because the LORD your God detests them both. --Deuteronomy 23: 17-18
4. Because of this, God gave them over to shameful lusts. Even their women exchanged natural relations for unnatural ones. In the same way the men also abandoned natural relations with women and were inflamed with lust for one another. Men committed indecent acts with other men, and received in themselves the due penalty for their perversion. --Romans 1:26-27
5. Do you not know that the wicked will not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived: Neither the sexually immoral nor idolaters nor adulterers nor male prostitutes nor homosexual offenders nor thieves nor the greedy nor drunkards nor slanderers nor swindlers will inherit the kingdom of God. --1st Corinthians 6:9-10
6. We know that the law is good if one uses it properly. We also know that law is made not for the righteous but for lawbreakers and rebels, the ungodly and sinful, the unholy and irreligious; for those who kill their fathers or mothers, for murderers, for adulterers and perverts, for slave traders and liars and perjurers--and for whatever else is contrary to the sound doctrine. --1st Timothy 1:8-10
7. In a similar way, Sodom and Gomorrah and the surrounding towns gave themselves up to sexual immorality and perversion. They serve as an example of those who suffer the punishment of eternal fire. --Jude 1:7

* only seven passages
* compare to 250 verses on the proper use of wealth 
* more than 300 on our responsibility to care for the poor and work for justice

Genesis 19:1-11
* Story of Sodom and Gomorrah
* Talk about homosexual rape
* Is God talking about the sin of rape or the sin of homosexuality?
* When other places talk about Sodom&Gomorrah, some talke about taking care of poor and justice
  Ezekiel, "This was the guilt of your sister Sodom: she and her daughters had pride, excess of food, and prosperous ease, but did not aid the poor and needy" (16:49)	.

Leviticus
* two verses
  "You shall not lie with a male as with a woman; it is an abomination"
  "If a man lies with a male as with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination; they shall be put to death; their blood is upon them"
* this is part of the 'holiness code', to set Israelites apart from Egypt and Cannaan
  chapters 17-26
* nobody take it seriously about the 'death penalty' part
* three Qs
  1) Do these passages refer to consensual homosexual practice (and whether that was even a recognized option in the ancient world), or do they describe the cultic practice of Israel's neighbors and adversaries? 
  2) Are these regulations contingent because they derive from particular challenges and situations the Israelites faced at that time (the importance of procreation, for instance, given that Israel was a nomadic people dependent on increasing its population for survival), or do they intend to establish universal sexual norms? 
  3) even if these regulations were normative for Israelites, do they continue to be for Christians given how many other Levitical codes are contradicted later in the New Testament or have historically been ignored by Christians.


NT verses
* Romans 1:26-27: "For this reason God gave them up to degrading passions. Their women exchanged natural intercourse for unnatural, and in the same way also the men, giving up natural intercourse with women, were consumed with passion for one another. Men committed shameless acts with men and received in their own persons the due penalty for their error."
* 1 Corinthians 6:9-11: "Do you not know that wrongdoers will not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived! Fornicators, idolaters, adulterers, male prostitutes, sodomites, thieves, the greedy, drunkards, revilers, robbers -- none of these will inherit the kingdom of God. And this is what some of you used to be. But you were washed, you were sanctified, you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and in the Spirit of our God."
* 1 Timothy 1:9-11: "This means understanding that the law is laid down not for the innocent but for the lawless and disobedient, for the godless and sinful, for the unholy and profane, for those who kill their father or mother, for murderers, fornicators, sodomites, slave-traders, liars, perjurers, and whatever else is contrary to the sound teaching that conforms to the glorious gospel of the blessed God, which he entrusted to me."

Questions to ask: 
1) Do they refer to consensual homosexual practice, to cultic prostitution or to male pederasty (where an adult male has sex with a younger boy, either as a coming of age ritual or on a commercial basis)? 
2) Are the New Testament authors pointing to specific behavior they have witnessed, or are they using a common "catalogue of complaints" against Gentiles (as there are similar complaints in other first-century Jewish writings about Gentiles)?

About being natural: 
Of these verses, the Romans passage is often cited as a "lynch pin" text because the Apostle Paul seems to make his argument on the basis of the natural order ("natural" vs. "unnatural" passions). But at another place Paul uses nature to justify his position on the proper length of men's and women's hair and the need for women to wear head coverings (1 Corinthians 11:2-16). As it turns out, arguing from nature was a common rhetorical device in Paul's day, employed by many contemporaries of the Apostle, and was similar to saying today, "The conventional wisdom is..."

Four Basic Views

Most Christians I have talked to fall into one of four groups regarding these verses, depending on how they address two questions. The first we've named directly at several points already: Do the passages refer to anything like the phenomena of life-long, monogamous or mutually consensual same-gendered relationships that we know of today? (It's worth noting that the word "homosexual" was not present in the ancient world but was instead invented in the 19th century.) The second issue we've only alluded to: Whether or not the passages refer to the phenomenon we are describing today, are we bound to ethical determinations made by persons living in vastly different cultures and times and whose understanding of the world and of God's activity was shaped and limited by their own cultural viewpoints.

Depending on how you answer those two critical questions, you will likely fall into one of our groups.

1. The passages in question refer to homosexual practice in all times and cultures and so universally prohibit such practice.
2. The passages do not refer to homosexuality as we know it today and so cannot be seen as prohibiting it. Other passages therefore need to inform our discussions about sexuality in general and homosexual relationships in particular.
3. The passages may or may not refer to homosexuality as we know it, but they -- and the larger witness of Scripture -- imply a view of nature and creation that supports sexual relationship and union only between man and woman, and so homosexual practice is prohibited.
4. The passages may or may not refer to homosexuality as we know it, but they -- and all of Scripture -- are conditioned by the cultural and historical realities of the authors and so offer an incomplete and insufficient understanding of creation and nature and so cannot be used to prohibit homosexual practice today. Rather, one needs to read the larger biblical witness to discern God's hopes for caring, mutually supportive relationships, whether heterosexual or homosexual.

As is often the case, one's larger theological or ideological commitments greatly influence how one reads these seven verses. The first and third positions, for instance, reflect a more conservative view and make it difficult to find anything but condemnation in the Bible for homosexual practice. The second and forth, in contrast, invite a more progressive interpretation of the verses in common and open the way to supporting homosexual relationships as several major mainline church bodies have done.

For those Christians who look to the Bible for moral guidance, two additional questions may be worth considering. First, do you see yourself represented fairly in one of the four groups above? Second, can you imagine that someone holding one of the other three positions is also a faithful Christian who loves God and neighbor and searches the Scripture for guidance in these matters, even if that difference puts you at odds on this matter? How professing Christians answer these questions will greatly determine future discourse on these matters and, more importantly, how they interact with persons who are gay or lesbian.

Location	
	Typical interpretation by religious conservatives	
	Typical interpretation by religious progressives & secularists
Genesis 19	
	Condemns all same-sex sexual behavior, whether by two men, two women, within a loving committed relationship or a "one-night stand.".	
	Condemns anal raping of strangers for the purpose of humiliation.
Leviticus 18:22	
	Condemns all same-sex sexual behavior.	
	Condemns gay ritual sex in a Pagan temple and/or males having sex in a woman's bed.
Leviticus 20:13	
	Condemns all same-sex sexual behavior.	
	Condemns gay ritual sex in a temple and/or males having sex in a woman's bed.
Romans 1:26-27	
	Condemns all homosexual behavior as unnatural.	
	Describes a group of heterosexuals who, against their basic nature, engage in same-sex behavior during ritual orgies.
1 Corinthians 6:9-10	
	Sexually active homosexuals will go to Hell, not Heaven, at death. Once truly saved, homosexuals will become heterosexuals.	
	Male child molesters and the children they molest will go to Hell, not Heaven, at death.*
1 Timothy 1:9-10	
	Condemns all same-sex sexual behavior.	
	Refers to child molesters and the children they molest.
Jude 1:7	
	Sexually active homosexuals will go to Hell, not Heaven, at death.	
	Humans who have sex with other species -- angels in this case -- will go to Hell, not Heaven, at death.


Report from Lawrence S. Mayer and Paul R. McHugh
http://www.thenewatlantis.com/docLib/20160819_TNA50SexualityandGender.pdf
- claim that homosexuals are not 'born this way'
- not peer reviewed
- McHugh is retired processor, his view is not Hopkins position
- Former Johns Hopkins Chief of Psychiatry
- reviews and discussions
http://www.patheos.com/blogs/warrenthrockmorton/2016/08/27/editor-of-the-new-atlantis-responds-to-my-critique-of-the-mayer-and-mchugh-article/
http://www.patheos.com/blogs/warrenthrockmorton/2016/08/23/the-new-atlantis-study-on-sexual-orientation-and-gender-identity-thats-not-a-study/
https://www.glaad.org/cap/paul-mchugh

A worth reading book
https://jhupbooks.press.jhu.edu/content/natural-history-homosexuality

Homophobia history book
https://www.amazon.com/dp/0312420307/ref=pd_lpo_sbs_dp_ss_1?pf_rd_p=1944687562&pf_rd_s=lpo-top-stripe-1&pf_rd_t=201&pf_rd_i=0801854407&pf_rd_m=ATVPDKIKX0DER&pf_rd_r=QE30N797DD8Q3F672DC6

Transgender
http://sciencecases.lib.buffalo.edu/cs/files/gender_reassignment.pdf

A course with downloadable pdfs
http://bobhay.org/u3a/homo_index.html

http://www.davidmyers.org/Brix?pageID=16
Most are straight, some are gay, and why it is that way.
http://www.hearingloop.org/MyersVitaArticles/MostStraightSomeGay.pdf

Better review of the issue
http://psi.sagepub.com/content/17/2/45.full.pdf+html

Paul McHugh Is Wrong: Transitioning Is Effective
http://genderanalysis.net/files/Paul_McHugh_Wrong_Transitioning_Effective.pdf


